first of all mr allen would you tell us something
about your early life including the names of your
parents the dates of their birth and death the
places where they were born where you were born and
the the date of your birth and the schools you
attended before texas a m okay well my father named
charlie allen my mother's name dolly allen my
father was born October 12, 1868, near
Smithville, Tennessee. My mother was born March
11, 1867,
and I might just say that she lived to be 102 in two
days before she died. She was born near Atlanta,
Georgia, and moved to Texas with her family in
1874.
Did she ever tell you anything about that trip?
Well, not very much. She was about seven years old
when they made that trip. And of course, you know,
back in those days, we youngsters didn't ask the
parents too much or grandparents too much about
the experiences. Quite a family of them came at the
same time, and I believe they came on the train to
some central point, and then they had relatives
near central Texas, near McGregor, Texas, where
they settled. Uh-huh. When did your father come to
Texas? Well, he came to Texas about 1890, and he had
a brother came out ahead of him down near McGregor,
Texas, and settled there, and my father came there
and worked several years, and then my mother was
married in 1895, and he bought several farms
there, and he died in May the 21st, 1954.
My mother died, I might say, March the 13th, 1971.
And
you were born in McGregor, then? I was born in
McGregor, Texas, on March the 27th, 1898. Did you
go to the schools in McGregor? Well, yes, but
before that I went to a country school. It was named
Hawthorne. We lived to the miles from the school.
It was kind of sparse in those days, and the wolves
were around and that kind of thing. My parents
wouldn't let me go to school when I was eight years
old, but I started in the second grade. You know,
about the only thing we had in those days was old
readers. And then I went there for five, six years,
then went to McGregor School and graduated from
high school there. Was that a one-room school?
Yes, one-room school, country school. Big old
coal-burning stove, one teacher, 30 or 40 boys and
girls, country boys and girls. And then you went,
what, through the eighth grade there, and then
high school in McGregor? Well, I went about
seventh grade there, then went to McGregor, and
went through high school, McGregor, and then I
enrolled down at the Aggies. What factors were
involved in your choice of A&M? Well, I had some
schoolmates go there year two ahead of me, and the
stories they told, it was fascinating. I couldn't
resist. I had no second thoughts. Did, uh, did you
go through any particular special procedures to
be admitted to A&M? Well, as I recall, we sent our,
the principal of our high school sent the
transcripts and we made them application and, um,
I still have the copy of that transcript and, by the
way, I have all my, um, report cards, even when high
school and college station, A&M. Uh-huh. But
there wasn't much getting in then if you, You know,
it'd get by and your dad could pay for it, but that
was it. So you had a diploma then from? McGregor
High School. McGregor High School. Yes, sir. And
that was an acceptable school for A&M, so. Yes.
Were there any, say, advanced placement tests?
Now, today a student coming to A&M can take a test
and, say, get credit for freshman English or one
semester of it. Could you do anything like that?
Well, we never offered anything like that. We
never had anything that presented or, no. Since
you were somewhat familiar with the customs of the
school, your reaction might be different than
others, but what was your first reaction to A&M and
College Station when you got there? Well, I
thought this was the grandest place in the world.
I'm assuming you went there by train? Oh yeah,
sure, and they'd pile up those trunks that were
mountain-sized. Everybody had a trunk in those
days. And they hauled them to your room, wherever
you were assigned. then the school was expecting
you and they had a room assigned to you. How did you
know where to go when you got to the school? Gosh,
it's been so far back. You know, I think they had
down at the depots, they had guides and things like
that to kind of... lead you around and get you
associated and kind of place you. I had no
particular idea of where I'd be placed and what
military company or dormitory when I arrived
there.
But I believe that's the way it was. They had kind of
guides. How did you get your trunk from the train
station up to campus? Well, there's an old man
there with a kind of a like the old grocery cart
years and years ago, wagons had a couple of mules
and he'd load those things on that truck or wagon
and haul them to his room. He had two, three
helpers, colored boys, and they'd take them up to
your room. I presume you had your name printed on
the outside of yours or? Well, I suppose I did, but
we probably put a tag on them and room number and
dormitory number. Okay. Could you describe for us
a typical day during your years at A&M, that is, the
time and procedures for getting up and about going
to meals, the time you spent in class and what you
did other than classwork, and then the time and
procedure of going to bed. Well, soon after we
arrived that few days, two or three days, we were
enrolled and sign the course that we're going to
take, sign up for that, and they would give us, sign
us to a military company, and a dormitory, and a
room number. Of course, a couple of my friends went
down with me from McGregor, and we roomed
together. Otherwise, we'd have drawn or selected
roommates, and of course, about the meals, the
first day or two, of course, we'd just hear them,
scare them, get the mess all the best way we could.
But as soon as they were organized, You know, we
lined up on that military walk and we marched to all
the meals,
breakfast and the loon and dinner time. And then
after the meal, of course, we left the meal, the
rest hall, and dispersed without military
formation back to our dormitory to get ready to go
to class or if we didn't have any classes to, you
know, other activities. Now that would prevail
all the four years I was there. And of course, by
going to bed, we had done confined to quarters soon
after dark, a study period for about a couple,
three hours. And in the early years there, we had a
sentinel that marched up and down the halls with a
bayonet and carrying a rifle. And to see that no one
left the rooms or gathered in rooms for bull
sessions and that kind of thing. And then about
9.45, something like that, they had a bugle blow
that released us from the study and gave us about 15
minutes to get in bed. And they came around and
checked the doors to see that you were there. But in
the later years, they kind of eased up on that
slightly, somewhat. But they had very close
supervision over the boys being in the room and not
having bull sessions and that kind of thing. Well,
when was your room inspected? Well, of course, the
company commander came around quite frequently
to inspect the rooms, to see they were orderly, the
beds were made, and they're clean, and the clothes
are in the closet, and that kind of thing. And
occasionally, the head military men from the
United States, you know, were signed up for the
ROTC units, came around on a general inspection.
and they would have our closet doors open and
everything to have them inspect in the closets and
under the bed and everything else. Were you given
notice that this inspection was to occur? Yeah,
the general inspection, yes, usually yes. But the
company commander's inspection was sort of...
Well, he could come around anytime and, you know,
he might, well, on the floor there, sometimes some
of the boys might get unruly and noise and that kind
of thing, and, you know, you know how boys are.
Yeah, and I lived in a dormitory for four years.
What was life like in the dormitory? I know that you
said there was a time, a quiet period, when you had
to be in your room studying, but during the rest of
the day, Well, of course, if you weren't in class,
you probably went to your room and prepared for
other class sessions or maybe lay down and take a
nap or maybe clean your rifle or shine your shoes or
get your laundry ready or write a letter back home.
You know, you always need a little money, you know.
You kept your rifle in your room then? Oh, yes, sir.
Did you have live ammunition or... Well, when we'd
go out on rifle range practice, but not in the
dormitory. Not in the dormitory. No, but we'd go
out to rifle practice. We did, yes. Okay. Just kind
of an aside, I know that at one period, one of the
favorite things was shooting out what's called
Prexy's Moon. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Of course, some of
those boys, you know, sometimes, you know, it's
easy to get a hold of a shell, you know. You know how
boys are. They pick up things, and they shoot out
Dr. W. Brazell was the president in those days.
Uh-huh. And, oh, he was a dandy fella, parted his
hair in the middle. He was a wonderful fella. He
taught a Sunday school class there, too. Uh-huh.
Well, I'd understood that he did that for a goodly
number of years. Yes, he did. Oh, they'd shoot that
precious moon out. Could you tell me what
dormitories you lived in? Well, at first I lived in
Ross Hall. And that was right on the military walk
facing west, one of the old time halls there. Been
gone a long, long time. And he called his students
there the Ross Hall Hellraisers. That's what they
were. Was that just when you were there, or? Well,
no, that was been going on for years. Rawls Hall had
a reputation. And I lived there, and then I lived in
Mitchell Hall. That was a new one at that time, just
north of the YMCA. That's gone now. Then I lived in
Leggett Hall, and... And Mitchell was torn down, I
believe, two years ago. Something like that.
Leggett, I believe, is still standing. Yeah,
still uses it. And I lived in Ross again. I lived in
Ross, too. And, of course, in that day, the toilet
facilities in Ross, see, it was three-story
buildings, I recall. The toilet facilities were
on the third floor. I believe the third floor.
Second or third, I can't remember which, but you
had to go up there. Okay. I might say the bugle
stand, you know, they blew the bugle, you know, for
all formations and classes. The stand at that time
was a great big horn, and it was right out of Ross
Hall, but you couldn't miss the... So you didn't
have any problem hearing it? No, I didn't have any
problem hearing it. Did... Then you lived in a
different dormitory every year you were there.
Well, Ross first in last year. Well, no, I lived in
Mitchell the last year. I lived in Mitchell two
different times, and Ross two different times,
and Leggett Hall. And that's about all the halls I
moved in. But let's see, the newer ones, Mitchell
and Leggett, probably had bathrooms on each
floor. Oh, yes, that's right, they did. And Bazell
Hall at that time was the newest. It was built while
I was at Bazell Hall, after Dr. Bazell. Yeah. What
was the food like in the missile? Well, of course,
we complained about it, but it was real good. You
know, the old, old fellow named Spieser, whom the
hall was named for, he was alive in those days. He
was an old Mexican man, as I recall. And we had
wonderful food. We complained about it a lot, but
then it was good substantial. Boy, I went there
with about 125, and I left there with 165, so... In
four years, considering all of the exercise you
got, I presume that was it. Pretty substantial
increase. In those days, we had long tables, about
12, 15 sets of tables. The upperclassmen at the
end, at the corner of the end, the freshmen in here.
And the dessert we called kush in those days. And
every now and then, the upperclassmen say,
freshmen, I'm taking your kush today. That means
the freshmen got no dessert. That happened quite
frequently. Today there's a custom that it's a
form of hazing, I guess. The upperclassman asks
the freshman a question, and it's a question if the
freshman doesn't find out the answer by a certain
time, he has to give up his kush for the day. Well, we
had all kind of trick questions, too, and you never
knew what kind of answer that brought on kush. In
those days, we had real hazing now. We had these
belts about that wide. Mm-hmm. A lot of little
boys, not freshmen, after their day or two, they
didn't sit down very frequently. They got to be a
sophomore. But, you know, it was your friends that
hazed you. It was your friends that hazed you.
That's right. I imagine, like anything, there
were a few who abused it. Well, maybe a little bit,
not much. You've got a lot of strapping, but it's
all good nature. The freshmen, I might say this,
that would not let them haze them were never very
popular. They were never very popular as a rule.
Oh, at the time, shoot, what's the difference?
It's all over now. Well, it only lasted for one year
anyway. Only one year. And then next year, we could
do the same thing. Yeah, yeah. Pass it on. Pass it
on. Pass it on, yeah. Okay. What privileges did the
upperclassmen enjoy that freshmen didn't have?
Well... Of course, as I say, they got to eat at the
end of the table in the corner, and that's where the
food was placed when it came in. That was one thing,
and they got the first serving of the food, of
course, always. And, oh, you know, we had to shine
their shoes for them and that kind of thing. That
was a privilege not to have to shine your shoes.
Clean the rifle. They had to do a good job. And they
were granted more permits than that time going to
Brine. You know, in that day and time, we rode that
old trolley car. There were no automobiles in
those days, speak of. And that was quite a thing to
go with Brian, go to those picture shows, you know,
and that kind of thing, to get away from the
reservation. How often could you go as a freshman?
Well, it seemed like I think we'd go every Saturday
afternoon without a permit from, say, after
dismissal at noon until formation in the evening,
5, 6 o'clock. And then, of course, you'd go on
special occasions maybe once a month, you know,
socially with a permit. I have some of those old
permits here that was granted me. The permit came
from who? Commandant. Commandant. Commandant.
Yeah, commandant. Military commandant. And did
you have to, did you ask him directly or did you have
to go through your company commander? I went to the
company commander. I think the company commander
had to okay it, then it had to be okayed. But the
upperclassmen can go more frequently. Oh, yes.
And then, of course, in the senior, and I got to be a
senior, well, you'd go on. or without a permit, you
know, on Saturday or Sunday, that kind of thing.
Quite frequent here. What else for you? Today's
students, many of them go home every weekend.
Even, you know, I would imagine at the time when you
were there, say, somebody who would have lived in
Houston could have gone by train without too much
difficulty. Were any of the students go home on
weekends? Not very often now. McGregor's got 125
miles from College Station. I only went home three
times in the whole four years, you know. Well was
that a study and you know the military and your
studies. Of course I took electrical engineering
which was a lot of math and that kind of thing. It
required a lot of study and we didn't have
transportation those days. No automobiles at
all. Maybe one or two or three. So mostly you'd go
home at Christmas then? Oh you'd go home
Christmas. Of course I'd get several days off and
And of course we'd always, in those days they had
the Cotton Palace Waco, which was kind of like Fair
Dallas, only smaller. We'd go up there and they'd
play Baylor every year. The cadet corps would go up
there and stack arms. And of course I'd go on out and
visit my folks overnight while I was there. And
then things like that.
What did, besides going into Baylor, to Bryan,
say, to the movie or anything like that, what other
things did the students do for recreation or
entertainment? Well, of course, we were engaged
in company athletics in those days. We had company
football teams and old basketball teams and all
kinds of things like that. And, you know, being in a
military school like that with classes and
supervised quarters, we didn't have a whole lot of
time, idle time on your hands. No. Well, you didn't
have a memorial student center like they have
today. No, no, no. With pool tables and things of
that nature. Oh, no, no, no. But were there things
that you could do at the YMCA? Oh, yes, there was
things like that. But, you know, the YMCA in those
days was rather small, and they had reading rooms
and a few things like that. And, of course, old boy
Casey had a confectionary down the basement
there, and you'd go over and get your drinks and all
that kind of thing. You know, it just couldn't
accommodate nearly what it should have been, of
course. Because in those days, that was kind of a
new thing, you know.
What about in the rooms, did the fellows gather for
bull sessions occasionally? Oh yes, you say when
you weren't having class, maybe several of them
not having class, they'd gather there for a bull
session and all that kind of thing and talk over
things and maybe study or and then you know there's
games they played you know, you know what games?
Snake eyes and those kind of things, you know.
Uh-huh. Somebody told me yesterday there was one
fellow that he knew that worked his way through
school with his pair of dice. I wouldn't be
surprised. Like Harold Dunn worked his way
through the hamburger stand. Yeah, yeah. You
talked to Harold Dunn, didn't you? I talked to
Harold Dunn, yeah. He told me about his hamburger
stand. Oh, yeah. I gather from what he told me that
that hamburger stand probably was not in
existence when you were there. No, no. No, they
were not. We didn't have anything like that. We
didn't eat much between meals. It wasn't an
occasion for it. They gave us plenty of food, and it
was good food. We complained about it, but it was
good food. And those days, most of the students,
you know, a lot of farm boys, they didn't have much
money to spend on things like that, you know.
Did you have any favorite instructors when you
were there? Oh yes, Dr. F.C. Bolton, who was head of
the electrical engineering department. Of
course, since I took electrical engineering, he
was a great, great fellow. Very soft-spoken,
easy-going, but he was a wonderful, wonderful
fellow. And he gave you a fair deal and that kind of
thing. And then in calculus, they called him
Cokie, Cokie Smith. And they called him Cokie
because he, well, some of the boys thought he was
slow and kind of sleepy, that kind of thing. They
called him Cokie. Well, in calculus, we had a line
up of alphabetic. Of course, my name began with A.
And it didn't take me long to find out that Cokie
asked me the first question right down the line in
calculus. But it didn't take me long to know that,
Jerem, you better get that first problem. And my
mother came down on my graduation and didn't have
motels then, you know. So I got a room to stay that
night, too, Cokie Smith. He told my mother, he
said, you know, I was the best calculus student he
ever had.
You were always prepared for that first question.
I was prepared. And you know, if you made a certain
grade, you didn't have to take the final
examination. Well, in the assignment, the
problems were all pretty much alike, you know, for
the assignment, so I don't really have to take any
of that. You say if you had a certain grade, you
didn't have to make finals. Yeah. Was that for all
four years?
I think it is today. I don't recall, just to tell the
truth about it, I don't recall. You know, I've been
out of that 54 years. Yes, I know. Today, I think
there are no final exams for seniors at all. Well,
it wasn't then, I'm sure, if you didn't make
top-level grades or something like that. And I
think if you have a certain grade, then you can be
excused from the final. Yeah. But if you think you
can raise your grade, well, you can go ahead and
take the final, and you kind of gamble whether
you're going to raise it or lower it. Of course,
there's other professors, you know, and I liked
them all. But, you know, after 54 years, your
memory's kind of dull, but I do remember those two
very distinctly. Well, let's see, I believe Mr.
Bolton then became dean of engineering. Yes, he
did. And he was acting as president. Acting as
president for once or twice. Yes, he did. Did the
students who were officers in the cadet corps
enjoy any certain privileges that students who
were not officers? Oh, yes, they did. In our own
particular case, and I know in my senior year, a
couple on a couple of those theaters in Bryan. They
gave all the cadet officers a pass to those picture
shows, you know, you paid the sale, or the war tax in
those days was, and that was one privilege, and of
course you got to wear better, you know, boots and
those kind of things, and that kind of thing,
and... Were these better boots issued to you, or
did you have to buy them yourself? Uh, but I, was
there a custom of all seniors wearing boots at that
point? No, not necessarily. Now not like it's been
the last few years. We used these, that's sewn
after the war, and you know in the war they wore
puttees, leather puttees. Most of them were
leather puttees. Just the regular shoes. Yeah,
with the leather puttees. Came up here, you know,
around your cap. We have one picture, and I forget
who's the man, the main man in the picture, but
somebody wearing a pair of cowboy boots, and he
claims those were the original Aggie boots. They
might have been back in those days.
Might have been.
What were the attitudes of the students towards
the administration? And I guess here you had a dual
administrative role. You had President Bezell on
one hand and the Commandant for the Bull on the
other hand. Well, of course, the bull, the
commandant, just had to charge the military
affairs only. And, well, I don't know. We didn't
have any dissension in those days. Oh, you might
fuss about them a little bit, but you heard no
rabble-rousing or those kind of things about any
of the teachers or professors or the bull, anybody
else. It was very cooperative. Throughout my four
years there, you didn't hear anything like that.
No. Oh, a few little complaints, but gosh. Nothing
serious. No strikes, no nothing like that. Okay.
It seems to me I have a picture in the archives
that's a group of students marching down to Bryan
in 1919.
And somewhere I had the indication that there was
some kind of a student discontent in 1919. Was this
people who had been in the service coming back and
exercising some discontent or something? The
only thing I remember marching to Brown when the
armistice was signed, some of the boys, I recall,
marched over Brown in celebration. But I never
heard of it. And I was there in 1919. I don't
remember any marching to Brown. And I don't
remember any protest of a group of students like
that are gathering around the campus talking
protest. I never heard any of that all the time I was
there.
No, sir. The four years that you were there, do you
recall that any new traditions were started? We
had some difficulty from time to time finding out
when something started I think we know about when
the bonfire was first started and a few other
things. That wasn't there, no. We had the junior
banquet and that kind of thing, you know, and I
presume we still do. But I don't recall any new
traditions that started while I was there,
except, you know, first years there, we wore that
old gray uniform. You know, well, it wasn't long
until we wore it. begin to wear the khaki. That was
one switch from the old type uniform that was
switched to the year I was there, first year I was
there. That was some tradition that was changed,
of course. Was that an improvement? Oh yes I liked
it better because well it was more casual I think
and it was a trend of the times because I was there
during World War I you know over the period and that
was a trend of the times the khaki was accepted
everywhere and the other uniform you know you'd
look at well oh that's a bunch of kids or cadets or
something like that you know. Did you have a lot of
trouble with those or did you have to ever have to
wear those puttees that you wrapped your leg with.
Yeah we call them wrap leggings. Oh yes I wore them
quite a bit. They weren't bad and you know it took
you a little while to learn how to wrap them but then
you got away they stayed up just fine. Yeah we wore
wrap leggings we call them. Yeah I guess the
puttees are really leather. Yeah they came up
about up to here and had a buckle over here and down
there. They were leather kind of stiff leather
form leather. Was there a strap that went
underneath the sole of your shoe, too? No, I don't
recall that. No, I don't think so. It might have
been. I don't think so. Okay.
So, but the, uh, the leather patis, were that
primarily worn by the officers? Oh yeah, only the
seniors, only the seniors. Oh yeah, that's a
special privilege. But so all the other students
have to wear the wrap leggings? Well, yes, sir, yes
they did. And then, of course, on our hat band, you
know, we had a different color hat band up here to
distinguish the senior from the other classmen. I
believe the senior was gold and black. And, uh,
freshman that was yellow blue but we had a hat band
you could always tell each year each year had a
different color yeah then you could tell you know
it's pretty easy to tell a freshman without any
coloration or anything else you know i believe now
it's uh they have different colored belts oh i see i
see we call them slimes in those days the fishermen
slimes you know slimy fish uh-huh yeah that was
your name for the fish slime slime come here slime
make my bed Slime polished my shoes. See what I
mean? Slime, real slimy. When a freshman
encountered an upperclassman whom he had not met
before, he had to introduce himself, did he refer
to himself as, say, Fish Jones or Fish Allen? I
think so, yeah. He didn't get much about fish. They
didn't call themselves slime. Oh, no, we didn't
call ourselves slime. We called ourselves...
That was... Did you ever have any girls in any of
your classes? We know that occasionally up
through the 20s there would be a girl or two in
school. There was one of the professors I recall,
and I forget the professor's name now, daughter,
or maybe two of them, was in class some of the years I
was there. one or two or three girls, the
professor's daughters, maybe taking special
courses, and they lived on the campus. I take it all
the faculty lived on the campus. Well, some of
them, I think some of them lived in Brown, maybe.
Okay, I believe.